# When news make history
## The Pacific chapter of World War II according to The New York Times and Le Temps 
EPFL - Applied Data Analysis project  
# Abstract
  The information we have access to defines the way we perceive the world. News media and journals in particular have contributed, since their very inception, to the spread of knowledge, influencing public opinion and setting the foundations for what we call history today. This project aims at extracting how events were reported from newspapers archives in order to enliven crucial historic events. More specifically we focus on the Asian-Pacific theatre of World War II.
  The data we are going analyze derives from two main sources: the “200 years news (Le Temps)” and the TimesMachine datasets. The former is the full archive of the last 200 years of two Swiss newspapers, Journal de Genève and Gazette de Lausanne, the predecessors of the nationwide newspaper Le Temps. The latter is the online archive of all the New York Times issues covering from 1851 to 2002. 


# Research questions
- How complete can a historical model drawn only from newspapers be? How different it can be from what we know? Are there significant inaccuracies? Why?
- Does information generated by different countries diverge? 
- How important were international news in the previous century?
- Can historical events be made more appealing by means of data visualizations?


# Dataset
* "The New York Times" online archive and the "TimesMachine" (also through the available APIs)
* "200 years news" (Le Temps) dataset on the EPFL cluster 
* We expect to get the set of relevant articles by performing a complete search by means of dictionaries of keywords and implement a method to retrieve information from pictures, maps and charts.

# A list of internal milestones up until project milestone 2

- Make sure we are granted access to both datasets, by requesting API keys for the TimesMachine and cluster access permission for Le Temps.
- Data filtering: we will look for news that refer to the aforementioned War scenario hence we will select only the subset fitting the project purpose. 
- Implementing a strategy to extract the information relevant to the research questions. 
- Exploratory data analysis: representation of the data to gain insight. Verify whether the data retrieval gave back meaningful information. Apply iterative procedure to correct our methods and deal with unexpected results.
- Sketching a preliminary version of the datastory.

# Questions for TAa
- What is the format of data from the "200 years news" dataset?
- Which libraries and frameworks are allowed for both handling and representing data?
